Circular dependencies and glue records

Name servers in delegations are identified by name, rather than by IP
address. This means that a resolving name server must issue another
DNS request to find out the IP address of the server to which it has
been referred.

If the name given in the delegation is a subdomain of the domain for
which the delegation is being provided, there is a circular dependency. In
this case the nameserver providing the delegation must also provide one
or more IP addresses for the authoritative nameserver mentioned in the
delegation. This information is called glue.

. . .

For example, if the authoritative name server for example.org is
ns1.example.org, a computer trying to resolve www.example.org first
resolves ns1.example.org. Since ns1 is contained in example.org,
this requires resolving example.org first, which presents a circular
dependency.

To break the dependency, the nameserver for the org top level domain
includes glue along with the delegation for example.org. The glue records
are address records that provide IP addresses for ns1.example.org. The
resolver uses one or more of these IP addresses to query one of domain's
authoritative servers, which allows it to complete the DNS query.


To see how it works, type this: dig +trace +additional google.com SOA

This will trace the nameserver authority starting from the root servers
(+trace). Adding +additional will also show you the ADDITIONAL section
of each DNS server response. Normally most people think of DNS in terms
of the QUESTION and the ANSWER sections, but ADDITIONAL also plays an
important role: if the nameserver knows the answers to any queries that
are related to the answer, it can pre-emptively supply those answers
in the ADDITIONAL section without requiring additional queries from
your client.

Note that the authoritative nameservers for google.com are rooted under
the domain they're authoritative for. (ns1.google.com, ns2.google.com,
etc.)

When you ask a nameserver to supply the list of nameservers for a domain,
they will often supply a list of A-type records (IP addresses) in the
ADDITIONAL section, not just the NS-type answers: these are called glue
records, used to prevent circular dependencies. In this case, those A
records are served from the TLD (.com, .org, etc.) nameservers based on
the IP addresses that someone supplied the DNS registrar responsible
for the domain. They can usually be changed by logging into the admin
web interface they supply you.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_Name_System#Circular_dependencies_and_glue_records
